### 4. What Are the Next Steps?

In sections above we have looked at different conceptions of who would use a public civil society database and what they would use it for; different proposals for what such a database should contain; and different existing and forthcoming information sources which could be used to seed and populate a prototype database. In this final section, we conclude with a series of reflections, recommendations and suggestions for next steps.

#### Building a Pilot Civil Society Database

Based on our analysis in the previous section, we’d suggest the **creation of a pilot civil society database drawing on CRD IV data in the first instance**. Here one may draw on the emerging craft of designing and assembling socio-technical infrastructures to facilitate collaborative "data work", including the creation, assembly and use of public data – from data journalism projects such as the Guardian’s The Counted[^18] or The Migrants Files;[^19] to civil society projects such as OpenStreetMap,[^20] OpenSpending,[^21] OpenTrials[^22] or a growing number of citizen data projects repurposing “born digital” data from devices or platforms to advocate for changes in what is officially counted (Gray, Lämmerhirt, & Bounegru, 2016). As suggested above, CRD IV data is the closest to civil society and OECD recommendations, and there are already several years of data available to experiment with. It also poses a set of challenges related to **discovery**, **machine readability** and **comparability** which may also occur in relation to other relevant areas of data collection and publication.

In particular, the CRD IV data might be used to experiment with **designing processes to assemble and align data** – including through **crowdsourcing mechanisms**, and **features designed to facilitate collaboration** such as version control and verification processes (to track provenance and check changes and additions to the data). The user stories that we have collected may serve as one starting point for the development of a pilot database, along with further research and testing. The user of participatory design and agile development methodologies may help to iteratively develop a pilot database in close collaboration with its users. Further development could proceed by identifying common ground between the most recurring and prominent analytical requirements and what is possible given the various limitations of existing CRD IV data. We suggest that particular attention should be paid to how the database might facilitate the assembly, collaboration and coordination between different "data publics" of multinational tax information.

While CRD IV data would serve as a good basis for an initial experimentation, the pilot should also be accompanied by **further exploration of data issues in other fields** – such as extractives transparency data, voluntary disclosures, the publication of national or regional OECD standard CBCR data, newly available beneficial ownership information, as well as other publicly available sources such as the ICIJ’s Panama Papers and Luxembourg Leaks data.[^23] This may include small scale initiatives in data collection and alignment, as well as in linking, connecting and reconciling different kinds of data. In the medium term, learning from the data issues across these different regions and sectors will help to inform the development of a civil society database which can accommodate and help to organise, keep track of and facilitate the analysis and use of heterogeneous types of information about multinationals from different sources.

A pilot database around CRD IV would provide opportunities for seeing what can be learned both **from the data **and **about the data**. On the one hand it would provide an unprecedented picture of the economic activities and tax contributions of multinational financial institutions with operations in Europe. On the other hand it would serve to highlight limitations and issues with CRD IV data, which in turn would suggest what is – and is not – currently possible to ascertain on the basis of this data, as well as feeding into ongoing efforts to shape what data is collected and reported.[^24]

#### Further Advocacy, Policy and Research Work

In addition to creating a pilot civil society database, what else can be done? The three sections above suggest future directions for advocacy, policy and research work.

In relation to question of *who* would use the database and *for what*, further work could be done to **identify, engage with and understand the needs of other potential users** of a public database. The user stories are suggestive of how a variety of practitioners envisage the different "data publics" of a civil society database, but further work could be done to obtain a more granular picture of who might be interested in multinational tax data. One approach to this would be to build on existing research (e.g. Seabrooke & Wigan, 2016) to map the different actors with an interest in multinational tax. This could follow a similar approach to previous research to map “issue publics” and “data publics” in other areas, such as around budget data (Gray, 2015; cf. Rogers, 2013). Further research could also provide a richer picture of analytical interests around the data (cf. De Renzio & Simson, 2013), as well as how the database would feature in the different workflows and settings of different actors who would use it. Of course, a pilot database would also help to compare the interests of envisaged or imagined users with actual users.

In relation to the question of what *should* be included, arguably the biggest priority is **policy and advocacy work to support public CBCR data** released in accordance with the civil society and OECD proposals. The current frontier is ongoing work around the national and regional implementation of these proposals. Collaboration around transparency rules, norms and practices across sectors and data types (e.g. natural resource transparency, open contracting, public spending data and beneficial ownership transparency) may also help to expedite convergence and consensus around common standards and disclosure rules, as well as creating opportunities for other data sources which may be added to a global database. As well as bridging between policy and advocacy work around tax justice and other transparency areas, there may also be opportunities to **build on global momentum for open data** - from the UN’s "data revolution" and the emphasis on data in relation to the Sustainable Development Goals, to open data initiatives around the world – such as the activities of intergovernmental organisations such as the World Bank; transnational and multilateral fora and initiatives like the Open Data Charter, the International Aid Transparency Initiative (IATI), the Open Government Partnership (OGP) and the European Union’s open data initiative; as well as national, regional and local open data initiatives around the world.

Finally, in relation to the the question of *how* data should be published, from the previous section it is clear that researchers, practitioners, policy-makers, public institutions and civil society groups should **work together to push for data which is discoverable, reusable, machine-readable and comparable**. This may include collecting and publishing machine-readable data through a single point of reference on official websites, rather than publishing data as part of existing company reports in PDFs scattered across the web. In accordance with open data principles, information should also be published using open licenses in order to facilitate re-use.[^25] The more substantive challenge is alignment around common definitions, standards, identifiers data practices – which will entail the creation and adoption of shared understandings of countries, companies, currencies and other elements that will be included in the database. Here we may heed recent calls for convergence around unique identifiers (e.g. Davies & Gower, 2016). This may entail changes not only in how data is *published*, but how it is *created* by multinationals in the first place. As with all shared practices of classification and standardisation, this will entail not only technical, but also social and political work (cf. Bowker & Star, 2000). The nature and focus of this social and political work may be determined by further study of not only how relevant data is currently created, but also an engagement with ongoing national and international efforts to create common data infrastructures, shared standards and reference lists that cut across different domains of data creation and use.[^26] These should be considered not just in terms of technological innovation, but also in terms of broader public deliberation and engagement around what public data infrastructures should do.

We hope progress in each of these areas will continue to be advanced through **collaborations between tax justice campaigners and open data advocates** – as well as associated journalists, researchers and practitioners – as we have sought to facilitate through the Open Data for Tax Justice Initiative which has made this report possible.

{::options footnote_nr="23" /}
[^18]:  https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2015/jun/01/the-counted-police-killings-us-database
[^19]: http://www.themigrantsfiles.com/
[^20]: https://www.openstreetmap.org
[^21]: https://openspending.org/
[^22]: See: http://opentrials.net/ and also Goldacre & Gray, 2016.
[^23]: See: https://panamapapers.icij.org/ and https://www.icij.org/project/luxembourg-leaks/explore-documents-luxembourg-leaks-database
[^24]: It is worth noting that CBCR data alone would not provide conclusive evidence that a company is avoiding taxes, nor to provide a conclusive answer to questions such as "Which companies are avoiding tax in my country?" that were raised in the user story section.
[^25]: See: http://opendefinition.org/
[^26]: See, for example, UK government activities in these areas, such as: https://data.blog.gov.uk/category/data-infrastructure/ and https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/registers/registers
